README.md, before:

# MERN Video Streaming Project

> I am writing a full in-depth explanation in my medium.com page. Please visit
> [Build a MERN based video hosting and sharing system](https://medium.com/@foyzulkarim/mern-based-video-hosting-and-sharing-system-part-0-setup-server-and-client-project-skeleton-948622f869da)
> to understand the whole architecture and step by step instructions.

## Overview

MERN Video Streaming is a cutting-edge, open-source platform for video
streaming, offering a comprehensive, full-stack solution utilizing the latest
MERN stack technologies. With MERN Video Streaming, users can easily upload,
manage, and stream videos on demand, providing a seamless experience. This
project features a video processing capability that provides real-time
notifications upon completion.

The backend is comprised of three services, utilizing Redis messaging for
communication. These include an API server, a video conversion service, and an
HTTP server serving HLS video files. On the client side, the project uses
create-react-app and MUI library, along with socket.io-client and React Context.

## Architecture

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/497812/220627727-04a26928-71df-4c9b-9637-92289a2beee2.png)

### Backend Services

#### API Server

The API server is an Expressjs app that uses Joi, Multer, BullMQ, Socket.io, and
MongoDB driver. The server communicates with Redis to process and store data,
and uses MongoDB as the primary database. The database and Redis are spun up via
the docker-compose command.

#### Video Conversion Service

The video conversion service is a node process that is responsible for
converting videos and communicating with Redis via the BullMQ library. The
service is not exposed to any HTTP port.

#### HTTP Server

The HTTP server is a plain and simple server that serves HLS video files.

### Frontend app

The client app is based on create-react-app and MUI library. It uses
socket.io-client and React Context to communicate with the API server and
display the video content.

## Prerequisites

To get started with MERN Video Streaming, you will need to have the following
software installed on your local machine:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)

### Built with Open-Source Technologies

MERN Video Streaming has been built with the following open-source technologies:

- [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) - A document-based database used to store
  user and video data
- [Express](https://expressjs.com/) - A Node.js web application framework used
  for the server-side of the application
- [React](https://reactjs.org/) - A JavaScript library for building user
  interfaces used for the client-side of the application
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) - A JavaScript runtime environment used to
  run the server-side code

## Installation

To run the project locally, follow these steps:

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:foyzulkarim/mern-video-streaming.git
```

### 2. Install dependencies using npm

#### 2.1 Server dependencies

```bash
cd server
npm install
```

#### 2.2 Client dependencies

```bash
cd client
yarn
```

### 3. Start the database and Redis

Navigate to the `server` directory and then run `docker-compose up` command like
below. It will spin up the databases as daemon mode.

```bash
cd server
docker-compose up -d
or
npm run db
```

Otherwise the updated `npm run start` script will start the database and web
servers altogether.

### 4. Start the application

#### 4.1 Create `.env` file

Create a `.env` file inside `server` directory and copy paste all the key-values from `.env.template` file.

#### 4.2 Create `uploads` directory

```bash
cd server
mkdir uploads
cd uploads
mkdir hls processed videos thumbnails
```

#### 4.3 Set the value of `API_SERVER` & `VIDEO_SERVER` for localhost

To run this project locally just set `http://localhost:4000` as `API_SERVER` and `http://localhost:4001` as `VIDEO_SERVER` in `client/src/constants.js`.

Make sure your server(`server/src/server.js`) running on port `4000` and your video-server(`server/src/video-server.js`) running on port `4001`

#### 4.4 Start the server

This will start all the backend services and database together.

```bash
cd server
npm run start
```

#### 4.5 Start the client

```bash
cd client
yarn start
```

### 5. Usage

You can now access the application at http://localhost:3000.

## Special note: Video folder structures

To upload the videos and serve them from server's folder we need to have below folder structure.

<img width="284" alt="image" src="https://github.com/foyzulkarim/mern-video-streaming/assets/497812/391fa393-50ee-483a-b3fb-a3e076c20b86">


## Contributing to MERN Video Streaming

MERN Video Streaming is an open-source project and we welcome contributions from
the community. If you would like to contribute to the project, please refer to
the `CONTRIBUTING.md` file for guidelines.

## License

MERN Video Streaming is licensed under the MIT License. Please see the `LICENSE`
file for more information.

## Note

Before running the above commands, make sure that you have Docker and Node.js
installed on your machine.

This readme file is not finished yet. I will update it as I go along with the
project. Thanks.

Commit message:

feat: add script for creating `uploads` directory (#24)

README.md, after:

# MERN Video Streaming Project

> I am writing a full in-depth explanation in my medium.com page. Please visit
> [Build a MERN based video hosting and sharing system](https://medium.com/@foyzulkarim/mern-based-video-hosting-and-sharing-system-part-0-setup-server-and-client-project-skeleton-948622f869da)
> to understand the whole architecture and step by step instructions.

## Overview

MERN Video Streaming is a cutting-edge, open-source platform for video
streaming, offering a comprehensive, full-stack solution utilizing the latest
MERN stack technologies. With MERN Video Streaming, users can easily upload,
manage, and stream videos on demand, providing a seamless experience. This
project features a video processing capability that provides real-time
notifications upon completion.

The backend is comprised of three services, utilizing Redis messaging for
communication. These include an API server, a video conversion service, and an
HTTP server serving HLS video files. On the client side, the project uses
create-react-app and MUI library, along with socket.io-client and React Context.

## Architecture

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/497812/220627727-04a26928-71df-4c9b-9637-92289a2beee2.png)

### Backend Services

#### API Server

The API server is an Expressjs app that uses Joi, Multer, BullMQ, Socket.io, and
MongoDB driver. The server communicates with Redis to process and store data,
and uses MongoDB as the primary database. The database and Redis are spun up via
the docker-compose command.

#### Video Conversion Service

The video conversion service is a node process that is responsible for
converting videos and communicating with Redis via the BullMQ library. The
service is not exposed to any HTTP port.

#### HTTP Server

The HTTP server is a plain and simple server that serves HLS video files.

### Frontend app

The client app is based on create-react-app and MUI library. It uses
socket.io-client and React Context to communicate with the API server and
display the video content.

## Prerequisites

To get started with MERN Video Streaming, you will need to have the following
software installed on your local machine:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)

### Built with Open-Source Technologies

MERN Video Streaming has been built with the following open-source technologies:

- [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) - A document-based database used to store
  user and video data
- [Express](https://expressjs.com/) - A Node.js web application framework used
  for the server-side of the application
- [React](https://reactjs.org/) - A JavaScript library for building user
  interfaces used for the client-side of the application
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) - A JavaScript runtime environment used to
  run the server-side code

## Installation

To run the project locally, follow these steps:

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:foyzulkarim/mern-video-streaming.git
```

### 2. Install dependencies using npm

#### 2.1 Server dependencies

```bash
cd server
npm install
```

#### 2.2 Client dependencies

```bash
cd client
yarn
```

### 3. Start the database and Redis

Navigate to the `server` directory and then run `docker-compose up` command like
below. It will spin up the databases as daemon mode.

```bash
cd server
docker-compose up -d
or
npm run db
```

Otherwise the updated `npm run start` script will start the database and web
servers altogether.

### 4. Start the application

#### 4.1 Create `.env` file

Create a `.env` file inside `server` directory and copy paste all the key-values from `.env.template` file.

#### 4.2 Create `uploads` directory

This will create `uploads` directory inside `server` directory.

```bash
npm run init-directories
```

#### 4.3 Set the value of `API_SERVER` & `VIDEO_SERVER` for localhost

To run this project locally just set `http://localhost:4000` as `API_SERVER` and `http://localhost:4001` as `VIDEO_SERVER` in `client/src/constants.js`.

Make sure your server(`server/src/server.js`) running on port `4000` and your video-server(`server/src/video-server.js`) running on port `4001`

#### 4.4 Start the server

This will start all the backend services and database together.

```bash
cd server
npm run start
```

#### 4.5 Start the client

```bash
cd client
yarn start
```

### 5. Usage

You can now access the application at http://localhost:3000.

## Special note: Video folder structures

To upload the videos and serve them from server's folder we need to have below folder structure.

<img width="284" alt="image" src="https://github.com/foyzulkarim/mern-video-streaming/assets/497812/391fa393-50ee-483a-b3fb-a3e076c20b86">

## Contributing to MERN Video Streaming

MERN Video Streaming is an open-source project and we welcome contributions from
the community. If you would like to contribute to the project, please refer to
the `CONTRIBUTING.md` file for guidelines.

## License

MERN Video Streaming is licensed under the MIT License. Please see the `LICENSE`
file for more information.

## Note

Before running the above commands, make sure that you have Docker and Node.js
installed on your machine.

This readme file is not finished yet. I will update it as I go along with the
project. Thanks.
